Kaleb had big plans for his best friend, KJ. To him, it was never a question of
whether KJ would get out of the hospital; it was simply a question of when. KJ,
after all, had a history of battling a body that betrayed him: A flu shot made
him sick when he was 13 months old; he learned he had leukemia shortly
afterward; he had two bone-marrow transplants. And yet KJ — Kenneth Gross Jr. —
seldom complained. “He was happy even though he went through all that stuff,”
observed Kaleb Klakulak, a 12-year-old of few words. But years of chemotherapy
and radiation ate away at KJ’s most important organ. By age 9, he had developed
congestive heart failure and by Jan. 7, 2018 — a few days after his 12th
birthday — KJ was admitted to a hospital full time. He needed a heart
transplant. Kaleb, though, was undeterred. In his mind, when KJ was released, he
and his mother would move north from Warren, Mich., to Romeo, Mich., where Kaleb
and his family live. The two boys would reside blocks from each other, as they
had when they met in the second grade.

On May 1, though, Kaleb’s mother, Kristy Hall, took a phone call from KJ’s
mother; she had a bad feeling about the call, and her intuition proved correct.
“I remember walking back home,” Ms. Hall said, “and thinking, ‘How am I going to
tell my son?’” When Kaleb and KJ first met five years ago, they could not stop
talking about each other and insisted on spending hours at each other’s houses.
Their mothers quickly understood why their sons got along.

Both were unusually quiet and were being raised by single mothers at the time.
They even looked alike, according to KJ’s mother, LaSondra Singleton. “Fat
cheeks,” Ms. Singleton said. “I call them brothers, just of a different race.”

Sometimes the boys put down their video games and spent a day at Greenfield
Village — a collection of historic buildings — or saw a movie. Kaleb even
invited KJ to come to his church, and KJ became a regular there who loved to
sing.

It all ended early this year when KJ was hospitalized for the last time. He
needed a new heart and was confined to the I.C.U., with a tube in his throat
that prevented him from talking. He became depressed — and doctors turned to
Kaleb for help.

Every Tuesday, for months, Kaleb and his mother would visit KJ. The boys would
play a wrestling video game and would also paint. The boys did not have to
communicate verbally, their mothers said. Kaleb would pick colors for KJ
seemingly knowing what he wanted. When 3 p.m. rolled around, KJ would extend his
hand to pray. And on Wednesdays, Ms. Hall would FaceTime with KJ from church.
Ms. Hall said KJ’s favorite worship song was “10,000 Reasons,” which she noted
for its prescient verse.

And on that day

When my strength is failing

The end draws near

And my time has come

Still my soul will

Sing Your praise unending
